CAUTION External Sender: This email originated from outside of the organization. Do not click links or open attachments unless you recognize the sender and know the content is safe.


Re: DF12830
    Complex analysis of Askaryan radiation: A fully analytic model in the
    time domain
    by Jordan C. Hanson and Raymond Hartig

Dear Dr. Hanson,

The above manuscript has been reviewed by two of our referees. In
addition to the Referee A, we consulted a new referee (Referee B) on
the suggestion of Referee A. Comments from the reports appear below.

The comments of Referee B suggest that considerable revision of your
paper may be in order. If you resubmit your manuscript, please include
a summary of the changes made and a brief response to all
recommendations or criticisms.

Yours sincerely,

Ansar Fayyazuddin, Ph.D. (he/him/his)
Associate Editor
Physical Review D
Email: prd@aps.org
https://journals.aps.org/prd/
Follow us on Twitter @PhysRevD

NEWS FROM THE PHYSICAL REVIEW JOURNALS

Sign up for PRX Energy email alerts
https://go.aps.org/3wvDYbB

Promoting Inclusive and Respectful Communications
https://go.aps.org/2TUnDQz

Physical Review Journal Metrics updated with 2020 JCR stats
https://go.aps.org/3e2aLyu

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Second Report of Referee A -- DF12830/Hanson
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The authors have adequately addressed my concerns and I can see the
paper is significantly improved with the reorganization and updates to
the simulations. My only comment is the the signals in Fig. 6 (right
panels) are clipped and the authors should consider expanding the
y-axis.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Report of Referee B -- DF12830/Hanson
----------------------------------------------------------------------

General discussion about suitability of the addressed topic:

This article is difficult to evaluate because it appears to be a
thorough analytical calculation of radio pulses in ice in the time
domain which seems to put in perspective and build from a couple of
earlier articles on this topic, namely references [20] (involving one
of the authors) and the original one [31] on the same subject (from
2001), and it provides expressions for the pulses in terms of
parameters that relate to the geometry and to physical scales such as
the longitudinal and lateral spread of the shower. In its second part
the article seems to validate these results by a detailed comparison
with an alternative calculation based on ref [19], which is used to
fit the pulses to those obtained in the alternative approach and to
get the best fit parameters. As such it could be both classified as a
theoretical paper on the mathematical modelling of radio pulses in ice
and also as a phenomenological article in which a given analytic
parameterization is compared to a more precise calculation. However as
one one gets down to the details and compares the results with those
of earlier publications, the article starts rising many doubts, in
particular about what is really new in the theoretical calculation
presented, and about what are the authors actually checking when they
compare their analytic expressions to the results obtained with
another "semi-analytical" approximation.

As a result I have been drawn into comparing the results of this paper
to earlier work in some detail to come to a reasonable conclusion with
respect to what is the actual reach of this paper. I have found that
the paper has many repetitions of earlier work and that it is
extremely difficult to say what is truly new in the analytical
calculation. The theoretical results are basically the same as those
presented in ref [31], only that they are now given in the time domain
and the form factor is evaluated with simple approximations of the
shower model, a gaussian for the depth development and an exponential
decay for the lateral distribution. Moreover the exercise of
converting the frequency domain to the time domain is already the main
content of ref [20], so perhaps the new contribution is to give an
explicit expression in the time domain for the radio pulse away from
the Cherenkov cone.
[In ref [20] the explicit expression of the pulse in the time domain
is only given in the Cherenkov cone. There is a small difference
between the two expressions but no comment is made on this difference.
Is this a correction? Moreover reference [20] treats LPM showers
incorrectly, because the frequency spectrum of the pulses has the
wrong low frequency limit (it should be the same as that of a shower
of the same energy and no LPM effect). In this article the authors
should discuss differences wrt ref [20] and address errors as well.]

The authors discuss in much detail the behavior of the results
obtained in the time domain, relating them to shower properties. A
non-expert reader could be misled into thinking these are new
findings, but most of them are actually well documented in the
abundant literature on this topic starting with the Monte Carlo
simulation of ref [13] and practically in all the articles that have
followed up to date. Stating these properties is not a problem of
course, moreover it is a plus because they serve as a check giving
confidence that the calculation gives reasonable results, however
proper references should be made to articles that have actually found
the same properties with similar or different techniques. Leaving
aside the inadequacy of the presentation of the results (to be
addressed below), the immediate question that crops up is, is this
result of enough new content to justify a new article in PRD? The
answer in my opinion is that the result could be of interest for the
field if the presentation of this is clear and the calculation leads
to a compact expression (it appears to be so) which describes the
pulses in this region with sufficient accuracy.

There is a phenomenological part of the article that compares these
analytical results in the time domain to an alternative calculation.
This comparison is used to find the fit parameters for the physical
scales of the showers. This, I believe, is new and maybe the authors
are intending to justify the approximations made in the new analytical
expression by making a detailed comparison of the result with a
reference calculation. Putting aside all the doubts that one can have
about the procedure used for such a "validation", the same question
comes up, is this sufficient to be addressed in a PRD paper? In my
opinion the answer is that maybe it is enough, given the outstanding
effort that is being made to exploit the radio technique in ice in the
last decade, and the current interest that the technique has for
neutrino astronomy. It is true that simple models for radio pulses
could be of much use at different levels in such experiments, as the
authors state.

Due to issues addressed above and a number of important issues that I
will address below, it is clear to me that the article cannot be
published in its current form and that major rewriting of the article
is required for it to be published in any journal. This would imply
adjusting the article to address my general comments above and to a
number major issues that are very diverse and I will try to summarize
in the text to follow. These problems are of sufficient severity and
number that the final decision on whether the article is adequate for
being published in PRD would depend on how they are finally addressed
by the authors and I will not make a definitive statement.

Major comments:

The length of the article. This article is far too long for the amount
of information given. More importantly it is written in a cumbersome
style so that it is very tedious to find out what is exactly being
done. It should be drastically shortened and simplified.

There is a lot of spurious text. Parts of the text are clearly to be
completely removed. I was particularly surprised to find out that
section III B, that takes nearly two pages and seems an elaborate
calculation, is simply an estimate of the width of the well known
Greisen and Gaisser parameterizations, as obtained approximating them
with gaussian functions. This is efficiently described in ref [31]
already (which is the basis of this work) with a reference to Bruno
Rossi. Most people working with showers have approximated the shower
development with gaussians so it seems too trivial to be reported in
detail. Moreover the derivation is particularly cumbersome. I do not
even think it should be put in an appendix, the final result can just
be displayed after a brief and clear description of what is actually
being done. Incidentally references could be made to [31] and to the
work of Andringa,S. et al. Astrop Phys 34 (2011) 360 describing both
the gaussian approximation, fluctuations in the longitudinal spread
(as named in [31], this is a better choice than "longitudinal length")
and corrections to it. Incidentally the authors have payed very little
attention to fluctuations in the shower profile which are relevant. It
is particularly relevant to understand how the fluctuations in the
longitudinal spread relate numerically to the small changes as the
energy is varied. The sections on the uncertainty principle are in my
opinion a distraction, it is not clear why they are introduced (nor is
it clear that the principle is always satisfied, which is suspicious).

A large number of variables is used together with several unfortunate
choices of notation. Although I would usually classify such a comment
under "minor issues about style", this article is particularly
exaggerated in this respect and more importantly it becomes an
obstacle to clarity, obscuring the reasoning and the expressions
presented and contributing to the confusion of the reader. Here are
some examples, again the list is not exhaustive:
The authors use unnecessary changes of variables introducing names
such as p,q,u, x, x_c, w_o, w_CF, w_1 ... that either giving little
intuition to interpret the expressions, or I cannot see the need to
introduce them all, and that in my opinion obscure the interpretation.
In places the authors introduce redundant variables, for instance
there is a cutoff frequency w_CF and a second one w_0 which is simply
w_0=sqrt(2/3) w_CF. One could question the need to introduce two
frequency scales which are so close, when a single one would do the
job. The introduction of sigma=w/w_CF is another unnecessary new
variable. For the lateral distribution a simple exponential is used as
an approximation. The radius is labeled "rho" in cylindrical
coordinates and a length scale is introduced as 1/rho_0/sqrt(2 pi)
which is extremely confusing because here rho_0 is used as an inverse
radial distance. 1/rho_0 is related linearly to the Moliere radius
(incidentally the definition given of the Moliere radius is
incorrect). It is unnecessary to introduce two scales for the lateral
spread given the simple approach given in this article, one of the two
is enough to set the scale and using two adds to the confusion of
variables, particularly with the unnatural definition of rho_0.
Another example of the latter type is introducing u=1-i eta, which is
not justified because afterwards an expansion is made in powers of
(1-u)=i eta, when u tends to 1. Clearly u is redundant and the natural
variable to use is eta, the limit corresponding to eta going to zero.
These problems include a few examples of bad choices of variables and
labels, but the list is longer. The article should reduce the number
of variables, change names where they lead to confusion such as the
previous case, and eliminate spurious definitions that obscure the
mathematical steps. Incidentally what I am demanding about improving
the notation would end with a notation very close to that used in
reference [31], which is an excellent article and has a rational
labeling of variables. It should be used by the authors as a guide of
style. Moreover, using the same conventions would make it a lot
simpler to relate their work to the original work by Buniy and
Ralston.

More careful referencing is compulsory.
The article has many issues with the references which are not
acceptable. These are actually the most striking alarms on a first
read. The first one is part of the first general comment, the way the
article references earlier work on theoretical calculations is
misleading, because the authors are not clear enough about what is new
and what is not. The article should make a fair summary of what is
being done in relation to what was done in the past, particularly in
ref [31], what ref [20] added to it and finally limit the first part
of this article to the minimal amount of material that is needed to
present the time expression that follows from the work of [20] and the
approximations made for the form factor.
I will mention a few others but the list is not complete.
In several places an inadequate reference is given, for instance the
authors cite Hanson et al [20] for the Greisen model, they cite again
[20] for showers with many maxima because of the LPM effect but the
showers described in [20] have no multiple peaks, and again refer to
[20] when they say that the lateral cascade width has the effect of a
"low-pass filter", while [20] may be the first use of such a "term",
such a reference is somewhat misleading in the sense that the effect
of the cutoff in the frequency spectrum related to the lateral spread
of the shower is described in multiple works on this topic, including
the early ZHS MC calculation. The citation of the semi-analytic
approach, ref [19], states that the method was "introduced ... to
account for non-Gaussian fluctuations in the charge excess profile".
This is simply not true, the method was introduced to provide a fast
and accurate method to describe radio pulses in general (similar to
the motivation behind the analytic calculation the authors are
discussing). The list again is longer. Such a careless citation style
is not acceptable.

The expression of the pulse in the time domain away from the Cherenkov
angle could be of interest. Yet the presentation of this result is
again not clear. The authors have split the calculation into the text
and the appendix in a way that is not adequate because the text cannot
be followed without reading the appendix. The expression involves
several approximations, firstly an expansion for small eta=w/w_CF
(more clear than in (1-u)). The result is an integral which is claimed
to be related to the line-broadening function. The comparison involves
the definition of w_1=t_r/(2p), which depends on the retarded time,
t_r. this is a variable and therefore it is not a number. So the
condition for approximating the integral obtained by the symmetric
approximation w_1<w is clearly not satisfied for p small, for t_r
large and obviously for low values of w that are unavoidable in the w
integral from infinity to -infinity. The justification of this
approximation is non-existent and deserves at least a careful
discussion.

I am doubtful that this is a good approximation. In any case the
authors could argue that the expression obtained this way is a
reasonable approximation to the pulse. In this respect the latter part
of the article, which compares these results to a reference
calculation, takes some relevance. I did not find such reasoning
though and if this is the intention of the authors it should be
clearly stated. Indeed when one looks at the comparisons made for the
off-cone case it is apparent that the agreement is a lot worse than
for the on-cone case. Given the number of approximations made, another
question crops up. What are the advantages of this expression relative
to those of ref [13] that are intended to provide a good and rapid
description of the pulses? This should be addressed for completitude.
Moreover the approach used is clearly not valid for the LPM effect
(this effect was also addressed in ref [20] with flaws), while the
approach of [13] can deal with fluctuations of the shower profile and
with the completely different profiles of showers fully affected by
the LPM effect. This issue deserves a discussion.

Incidentally a comparison is not made relative to a detailed
simulation but rather to a calculation based on [13] that uses the
simulation of the radio pulse in the Cherenkov cone to calculate the
radio pulse away from it. This presumably has been done because [13]
is fast but it is nevertheless an indirect way to compare. Some
discussion of this is missing and multiple references are given to a
simulation package that includes the approach of [13], what again
leads to confusion because the reader may doubt whether they are
comparing the parameterization to a MC simulation or to another model.
If this is the case it needs to be discussed.

There are many other issues of the paper that I am not willing to
spend more time in writing because the condition for me to accept this
article for publication is that the authors should rewrite it
according to all these recommendations and concerns.
